Documentation

Introduction

This program computes the normal and the cumulative skew of two selectable
nucleotides for a given sequence. The result is displayed in two different
graphs.

The user can choose the pair of nucleotides the skew should be calculated for.
In such a skew the relation of the nucleotides is given by a formula.
The particular values are computed by the formula:
Skew = (nucleotide1 - nucleotide2) / (nucleotide1 + nucleotide2)

For the computation the genome is separated into parts, socalled windows.
For every window the value of the skew is calculated. The normal graph displays
every single value related to the particular position in sequence.
The cumulative graph adds up the values for all previous windows up to the
certain position.
The windows are shifted along the sequence by a certain stepsize.
To improve the result the stepsize can be reduced.
The global minimum and maximum are displayed in the cumulative graph.
The minimum and maximum of a GC-skew can be used to predict the
origin of replication (minimum) and the terminus location (maximum) in
procaryotic genomes.


Tutorial

How to access a file

After starting the program you can open a file by using the menue (File/open).
Please notice that only text files containing a single sequence without any
additions or the sequence in FASTA-format are allowed.
For further information about FASTA-files please visit
http://athena.bioc.uvic.ca/pbr/VGO/manuals/fasta_acquisition/fasta_acquisition.html

After loading the file the program automatically draws the graphic using the
default settings (nucleotides G and C, resolution 1024x768,  windowsize and
stepsize sequencelength/1000).

How to change settings

The windowsize, the stepsize and the nucleotides are selectable. It is not
allowed to select the same nucleotide in both fields (e.g. A and A).
If this happens the complementary nucleotide is automatically set for
the second field.
If you increase the windowsize and decrease the stepsize you will get
more significant values but the calculating time will be longer depending
on the capacity of the computer you use.
That's why the step- and windowsize are limited.

Negative values are not allowed. Therefore the value will be set one by default if you try to type negative ones. The sizes for the window and the step
are restricted as well. The size for the window must be larger than the
length of sequence divided by 10000 or rather the length of the sequence
divided by 1000. If you change the settings the skew will be automatically
recomputed.

How to save the results
 
You can save the results in different forms. The graphic can be saved in
jpg- or png-format (File/save plot as image).
The first column in the text file lists the positions of the single values,
the second column shows the normal and the third column the cumulative values.
The data of the skew can be saved as a text file (File/Save plot as text).
You can use this file to export the data into a spreadsheet program
(e.g. Excel) to create a diagram with your own settings.
The program types the minimum of the cumulative graph of the computed skew into
the field “oriC”.
You can also save the sequence with the calculated origin of replication as
start point of the sequence. You can decide to change the value of the origin.
After changing the origin this field is protected and marked yellow even if a
new plot is computed. If you want to save the rearranged sequence press
File/Save sequence.

System requirements:

Java2 (1.4.2 recommended)

Operating Systems:
Every OS that runs Java2
(tested on Linux, Windows, MacOS X)
